
Intro: you presuppose a god?


1: 
Be science-friendly
This is also part of being reasonable but a bit more specific.  What it means is that the evidence and conclusions that come out of science are taken very seriously.  It may be our best picture of how the universe works, within its limits.  I include the term “friendly” because science is always evolving. It is constantly open to revision and that is one of its great attributes. What this also means is that science often gets things wrong, or at least partially wrong. "So, a certain level of skepticism is warranted especially when it conflicts with theological assertions that have gone through a rigorous, systematized approach."

contentious, methinks.

do you have an example of said theological assertions conflicting with a scientifically derived model?



2: "Now, as I said, the boundary of this limit may shift as science continues its investigations but there does seem to be a limit to how far science can answer the why-question."

Does the scientific method allow us to answer any why question?


3: "While the boundary layer of this limit may shift, there comes a point where metaphysics takes over."

Really?  When does this occur?


4: "What this means for theology is that a level of discernment is in order to determine where empirical investigations leave off and metaphysical speculations begin."

How do we make this discernment, and, well, why?

Why not continue employing the scientific method?  It continues to work, right?

How do we make metaphysical speculations rigourous, and, systematic?


5: "So, the method I’m proposing for developing a systematic theology “from scratch” is to determine the existential issues and problems in play and then seek to address those issues within the adopted criteria, at the same time,  utilizing all the resources available."

To what resources do we refer here: circumscribed to all the religious traditions in our midst presently?

Or, shall we admit resources in general: namely, resources that may be available from any source, where the resource may prove beneficial you your quest?


6:  "Instead, for instance, if ontology is the current focus in addressing problems, it should be asked what ontology would mitigate the problem of evil but also provide satisfactory “solutions” for free will, divine action, prayer, consciousness, and others."

This may have answered my Q5.

Given the limitations of Xianity or Buddhism in their individual responses to the rpoblem of evil, your proposed solution here is to take a broader look at the spectrum of theological and phisophical expedients, where altogether, these may offer a more holistic, per se, solution?


7: "Otherwise, the threat of contrivance raises its ugly head."

Agreed: let us remain vigilant lest contrivance should rear its ugly head.


8: "To put it in engineering terms — test, test, test. "

Agreed: yes, yes, yes, please!


9: "I call this a faithing fallibilism. It is an approach to the system as reasonably true but also humble in its certitude."

I'm not sure??

IMHO: perhaps it may be better--common meaning assumed--that we approach the system agnostically: i.e., neither reasonably true (reasonable) nor false (maybe not so reasonable).  We let the results of the tests dictate which way the pendulum swings. Perhaps.


10: "I believe this is an eternal process where the depth of the divine is probed, gotten both right and wrong, tested, modified, and on and on."

How does one test in this environment/scenario?  And, once a test is completed, how does one evaluate results?  Against what criteria are the evaluations made?


11: "Minimalism ... Certain extrapolations from fundamental principles can be useful, but I think there is a point where they can go overboard, not adding anything helpful and often creating an unnecessary, unreasonable complexity."

Aha, I sense you may be partial to the great William of Ockham?

I am.


12: "... but one where people find it personally compelling and actionable that can shape their understanding about life and how they should live."

Spot on!!!


13: "God’s purpose in the world."

How does one determine the above?


14: "Here think of being able to dance, play jazz, or paint a work of art.  We know how to do those things but it might be difficult to describe how in explicit terms."

Hmm...

Playing jazz is something that is handed down from generation to generation, methinks.

From William C Handy, to the Original Dixieland Jass Band, to Ma Rainey, to George and Ira Gershwin, to Duke Ellington, to Bill Evans, to the Marsalis brothers ... 


15: "What this means is that structural components like logic and reasoning (cognition) need some emotional weight or value applied in order to come to some useful resolution."

I trust we make the distinction between emotional in the context used above, and emotional in its quotidian use, right.

Like contrivance, let us remain vigilant for equivocation please.


16: "So, what religious intuitions are we talking about? This is where things get a bit vague."

You said it.


17: "Accordingly, they need to be tested in whatever means possible. ... Test, test, test is again the mantra to employ. "


18: "Faith is required but not blind faith or faith without evidence."

Perhaps you may define fiath for us please?

From my understanding, faith suggests belief without evidence.  If there is evidence, wherefore the need for faith?


19: "I think the key goal here is to be reasonable.  Looking at scientific findings for informing theology is a delicate balance of exploring the implications of that information while trying to be as objective as possible."

Hear!  Hear!


20: "So, we’re back to a faithing fallibilism.  This means making a commitment to some set of beliefs but also accepting we may be wrong, at least in part. It also means being willing to change as new information comes in."

I agree: "accepting we may be wrong"; "willing to change as new information comes in"

Not sure: "making a commitment to some set of beliefs" -- I prefer perhaps, "let the evidence--whatever we take evidence to be--lead us to a commitment."


21: "A systematic theology that cannot adequately address all criticism will not be adequate."

Agreed in part.  Not sure that a thing, theology, that we may consider to be significantly complex may be able to address all criticism.  I'd accept being able to address criticism that may perhaps challenge some of its fundamental understandings.


22: ""


23: ""




































































































































   
